# Education-Outcomes-for-DHH-children-in-DPS

Project Objective.  The goal of this project is to examine the long-term education outcomes of deaf and hard-of-hearing (DHH) children in the Denver Public Schools (DPS).  The outcome measure will be the Colorado Student Assessment Program (CSAP), the state's standardized achievement test administered to children in grades three through ten.  One glaring problem is that only a subset of children have even a single CSAP score.  I will therefore be exploring other tests that measure the same skills as potential proxies for the state achievement tests.  As explanatory variables, I will include laterality (bilateral vs. unilateral hearing loss), and degree of hearing loss (mild, moderate, severe, profound).  

The ultimate goal is to tie these educational outcomes to language and cognition measures collected before children even entered school.  The lab I work in has been following some of these kids (19.39%) since birth, tracking language, cognitive, and social-emotional development.  Tying their early standardized test scores with later achievement test scores will be very informative.

Motivation.  The State of Colorado was one of the first states to implement Universal Newborn Hearing Screening, where all newborns' hearing is tested before the infant is released from the hospital.  The rationale for this is that earlier identification of a hearing impairment will allow clinicians to provide support and services earlier, as the child starts to learn language.  With adequate support, children should learn language normally, either oral or manual, and then won't be at a disadvantage once they start school.  The problem is that even though Universal Newborn Hearing Screening was implemented in 1997, there haven't been any long-term studies to test whether early identification is effective at improving long-term education outcomes.  

Challenges.  The file from DPS contains a total of 289,456 test results for 686 DHH children in the district.  The results are collected over a child's entire tenure at DPS, and so is time-series data.  However, there is a lot of missing data.  Early exploratory analysis revealed that only 47.67% of the students have even a single CSAP score.  Of those that do have CSAP scores, very few have a complete eight years of scores.  Families move into and out of the district.  Some children might pass the hearing screen at birth, but then develop a hearing loss some time later.  And some children have comorbidities, or additional impairments on top their hearing impairment that can adversely affect educational attainment.
